There are stories which tell of the events which took place long ago on this earth of ours.
They say that this story took place at Gobernador Knob.
Those called First Man and First Woman, and White Shell Woman and Changing Woman had come together and they were sitting.
Just as dawn was breaking First Man went out doors to urinate; he glanced over at the peak of Gobernador Knob, and saw a little cloud hanging there, it is said.
When he went back inside he said, "I wonder why it is that there is a little cloud hanging over there on the summit of Gobernador Knob?”
"Come on, you boys. Remember what you said," said Black Horse.
The one called Limper was the first to hop in there, and he grabbed the Agent by the collar.
Then they all rushed in.
Chee jumped over the gate at the back of the room,
and chaos followed.
"Outside with him!" voices were saying.
They started out with him.
As they were taking him outside I crawled and squeezed myself out among them.
Just then they locked the door from the inside.
Two of the boys who were going to go to school were locked in.
The one I referred to as River Man, who is now known as Short Hair, and another boy with him. These were the ones who were locked inside.
On account of this fact the man I spoke of as Weela took the Agent's side -
it was because one of the boys locked in there was his son.
The mob was carrying the Agent away.
Not far from there, there was a drop.
There was a wash in the blue clay with a point of land on either side.
That is how the trading post got its name.
It was a long drop.
"Throw him down there!"
down there
down there" voices were heard saying.
A lot of people were standing alongside the trading post, and I among them.
My uncle was standing beside me,
and I don't remember who else was standing there.
As the people carried the Agent along they beat him with their fists.
They were beating him up.
But as they carried him further away the one called Bead Clan Gambler went running from here where we were standing.
Over to one side of Black Horse the people were merely milling around.
All of them had their horses standing there nearby.
Many more joined him,
and among these were some women.
These women too had spent the night there with them.
They had stayed to cook for the men.
One of these women had come from over beyond the mountain.
I don’t know exactly where she came from.
When this happened Black Horse’s henchmen spoke without effect because there were others who were trying to keep order and who said "No" to the proposal to attack the soldiers.
I was one of those who came back (on the next day) to where the people were.
And I found that the people from beyond the mountain - those among whom the news had been spread, and who were sent for - had arrived.
They had guns and bows and arrows.
These were many people.
There were also many of us who had joined in just as spectators.
A man of the Salty Water Clan whose name was Slender Lava had his family there, and his wife cooked all night for the men who were making the trouble.
In the morning the women again prepared food for them.
Then the people noticed that the soldiers were moving along over there.
All right now! All right!
We’ll take them right over there in the flat.
All right now!
Before they move in! Before they move in!
Let's get them!" said Black Horse dashing about but without effect.
But his boys were really impatient.
My forbears, the old men and women folk, were of the Mexican People Clan. With great hardship they came back from the place called Fort Sumner, packing their goods on their backs, and afterward lived here at Lukachukai.
Here they began life anew.
Then from their home at a place called Spring in the Clay they started moving over and across yonder mountain.
While they were making this move they stopped for the night, and it is said that I was born where they halted.
Let’s see, I believe it was in the month of October
I was born on a night when a heavy snow had begun to fall.
My gradnfather, a man by the name of White Mexican Clansman, and another man called The Son of Former Sweathouse, were the only men. They and several womenfolk worked hard on me.
My grandfather had a fine wether goat that he was quite proud of. He killed it there, and the people feasted with great joy.
Then on the day following the night of my birth we again started to move.
In those days people went about only on horseback
On the day following the night on which she gave birth to me, my mother went on foot as far as the people moved that day.
And since it had snowed the night before they had to go through the snow.
It is remarkable how risky life was in those days.
Nowadays when a woman gives birth they take special care of her, telling her not to catch cold.
Back at that time it was different.
As time went on I somehow grew up. I do not remember much about it.
I do not remember in detail much of what happened before I was about ten years old.
When morning would come and I would be sleeping nicely, my grandfather would throw me out of bed.
Come on! Come on!
Why are you lying down?
Go run a race.
If you're weak the first harmful thing that comes along will run over you.
If you are strong you will lie hudled in death only after the dirt is torn and furrowed around you (i.e. you will give up only after a struggle)," my grandfather used to tell me.
The old folks all used to say that.
They probably said this because they knew of the wars that were going on.
That is the way my grandfather drove me about and spoke to me.
He did not speak in anger.
He did not speak harshly.
He told it to me in a nice way.
So that is the way I spent my days from that time on.
I had an uncle by the name of Forked House. He was a young man, and he adopted me.
He started sending me on chores.
I would take care of his horses for him.
He had a wagon and a team.
He would tell me to haul wood with it, or to work with it.
At the time I was about eighteen years old the person who started the present trading post at Blue Clay Point moved there - I used to know just when it was.
They used to call the Former Old Interpreter (Chee Dodge) Chee (Red) when I first heard of him.
Chee was a good friend of a white man from Ugly House (Manuelito, N.M.) known as Big Lump Setting Up (S.E. Aldrich).
The two of them built the trading post at the place called Blue Clay Point.
It was in the Spring when they moved there.
There was an epidemic in progress, and we now refer to it as "the time when the throat killed many."
It was at that time, in the spring, that they moved to Blue Clay Point, it was said.
That is how it came about that the one who would be called The Interpreter (Chee Dodge) and the one who would be named Big Lump Setting Up came to move there.
They built the trading post and four years later perhaps, I do not recall exactly when, the one I called my uncle told us to haul wood there.
They (the traders) probably called for the wood.
There was a boy of the Big Water Clan with whom I always chummed around.
We started doing that kind of work.
We went about calling each other "younger brother,"
and we hauled wood to the trading post.
We heard reports that there were people going about to get children put into school.
It was said that they were then over at Chinle,
and we heard that they were coming here sometime soon.
We would discuss it when we took the wagon after wood.
"Say, let's go to school," I said to my companion.
"All right," he said.
And we went about, talking enthusiastically about it.
In the evening after we had unloaded another load of wood we started back home in the wagon.
When we got back to the hogan we found that my uncle was there.
And it turned out that my grandfather, who was called Big Mexican Clansman, was there too.
So we told them of our plan.
"They are putting chidlren in school, it is said."
We told them how we had both said, "Let's go to school."
"It's probably all right.
A party is in its way coming to us.
You cannot escape them anyway," my uncle and my grandfather said to us.
On the next day we went to the trading post, and my grandfather put his thumbprint on a paper for us.
It was reported that the children from Chinle who were being taken to school would get there in two days, and we heard the grownups talking to one another about it.
Of those menfolk who were talking to one another about it, one was called Weela. He lived over behind Round Rock
and was one of the leaders at that time.
One was called Bead Clan Gambler, and he was a member of the police force.
He was a very strong, husky man.
He was from Chinle, but he was a member of the police force at Fort Defiance.
He had come on ahead with the white man from Fort Defiance called Little Chief (Agent Dana Shipley).
It was there that my grandfather spoke and promised us.
"I am putting these two boys in schcool." he said by way of promise.
Since it was reported that it would be another day before the wagon load of children would arrive, we went back home.
We spent the night there and then returned on foot.
And we found that the children had arrived.
There was some man of the Bitter Water Clan whom people called Pug Nose. He was going around with the party, taking care of the children.
He knew a little English,
and that was probably why he was told to take care of the children.
He was keeping them together.
The children from Blue Clay Point who were to be put in school had not all been brought in as yet.
It was said that the wagon with the children would start off in two days.
They were to go by way of Lukachukai, Tsaile, and Crystal, and on over to Fort Defiance.
That was probably their plan.
But the people who live over beyond yonder mountain in the area of Cove and Red Rock were thinking ugly thoughts about the plan in connection with education.
It is just recently that these people became old men, and they have all died.
At that time, when they acted as they did, they were young men.
They said that if this business of taking children to school got to them they would really do something about it.
As we came to find out, they were saying that (the school) would not get a one of their children.
A man by the name of Black Horse was the leader of that faction.
They had no doubt heard that in a certain number of days a party would come to Blue Clay Point for the purpose of putting children in school.
So they began to think of the matter with bitterness.
"Boys, let’s go there.
Come on!", they probably said.
So they probably set out from there for this purpose (of opposing the placing of children in school).
We had not heard of this and knew nothing about it.
They met (the school party) at Blue Clay Point
Near the trading post there was a house which
at that time, we called the Ugly House.
The house served the purpose of providing a place to sleep for the people who came to the trading post.
Black Horse's party went over there,
and they no doubt came with evil thoughts. The people who, lived hereabout had heard nothing of their plans
but at night they spoke about themselves, revealing their intentions.
The one I referred to as my grandfather, and another uncle of mine called Little Boy, apparently went there at night and heard them telling about it.
Among those present were the men known as Black Horse, Limper, Tall Red House Clansman, Old Bead Chant Singer - who was of the Red House Clan - and his cousin, a Bitter Water Clansman called Bead Chant's Nephew, and another man with whom I was merely acquainted, and who was a relative of mine by marriage. His name was Yellow Fermentive Chewer. These are the only ones I can remember of those who came from there (on the other side of the mountain).
I do not remember who the rest were.
They probably planned to go in to see the Agent on the next day.
They no doubt told what they thought - what their opinions were regarding this school business that had started in connection with us. They told these things to the people from here who had gathered.
So people began to think along the lines of their planning.
"Now men, is there anyone here who can do it (a chant)?
Long ago, people of old had a story of some kind of chat called "Talk One Into the Grave." Who of you knows it?" said Black Horse, asking that it be perfomed.
These people from the other side of the mountain were saying this.
This is what that is what I heard. I wasn't at the meeting myself.
And I don't know just how this chant goes.
"I do, " said the one I referred to as Little Boy.
Two of you are needed for it," said Black Horse.
So then my grandfather, the man I spoke of as Big Mexican Clansman, volunteered to join him
to carry on the ceremony.
South from the trading post there is a ruin which we call in Navajo "Shattered House." Someone burned it long ago.
It waid that they were Anasazi.
It is black there like ashes.
It was there that they carried on the ceremony.
I don't know how it was done.
That is what took place that night.
As for us, we spent another night at my uncle's hogan.
Today we had been placed among children who were to be taken off to school.
On the morrow we would start off with them. So for that purpose, in the morning we again started off from the hogan afoot.
We left with menfolk,
with the one who would thumbprint the papers for us and who would vouch for us. It was my grandfather, Big Mexican Clansman.
He stood up for the two of us.
When we got to the store we found that many people had assembled.
Many horses were standing about.
At that time horses were the only means people had for transportation.
Some of us did not know what had been done the night before.
Someone by the name of Black Horse had brought a party from the other side of the mountain.
That is all that we found out .
We were told that now there would be work here
making out papers for more of our children.
There were three Navajo policemen there in that connection.
One of them turned out to be Bead Clan Gambler, one was Singed Man from Fort Defiance - he was also known as Son of Former Rag Man.
Another was Interprete's (i.e. Chee Dodge's) brother-in-law,
a Red Streak Into Water Clansman. This man was killed recently at St. Michaels at a rodeo. He was killed by a racehorse on the track during the race.
At that time he was a policeman.
I can't think what his name was - I merely knew him by sight.
He was merely called Interpreter's Father-in-law (?)
He was a policeman back at that time.
So there were three policemen.
It happened that way.
Then we were told that the time had come.
We saw the people going inside the trading post,
so we just went with the crowd.
We two who were going to school stayed together.
As for the rest of the children who were going to school, I don't know anything about them.
At the time we had brought the last load of wood; while we were unloading it we noticed two women leading a horse nearby.
They were probably on their way home.
One of these women had promised her son for school.
The woman glanced our way. Her name was Red Buttock Clan Woman. She is still living
and her hair is white.
As she passed by she said, "It is said that those boys who are unloading wood over there have been promised for school - they will go to school too.
Golly, why they are big enough to be of use here now.", she said of us.
I don't know what she had in mind in so saying.
We just laughed about it afterward.
But that was right. We had volunteered for school.
We considered school as good news.
That was what I thought.
I always told my friend about what I myself was thinking.
"You see, it's something to strive for and covet. Look at Chee's trading post here.
Quite some time ago when they moved back from Fort Sumner he had a hard time. He started his life by poking around in the horse manure in a stable.
He used to be out there early in the morning with a stick especially made for that purpose.
He could be seen sitting out there silhouetted against the sun, with the light shining red through his hair.
This is how he came to be called Chee (Red).
Then some white people took him in.
That is how he got his start in life.
That is how his mind began to develop. He got ahead and now here he is in his enviable position.
He knows English", I said.
That is what I had an ambition to do at that time.
It was for that reason that I volunteered myself for school.
And the person who had joined me thought likewise.
With this in mind I wanted an education badly then.
But it was destined to turn out differently.
The people went into the trading post.
It was packed full.
Over here on one side the counter ran.
Further back in the room was a swinging gate.
It was out through there that Chee came.
The brother of The One Who Has Eyeglasses (John Lorenzo Hubell) from Ganado, a man called the Bat, was a clerk there. He was over to one side behind the counter.
The Bat was a man who could understand Navajo very well.
A little later the one called Little Chief (Shipley) came out
and stopped beside Chee.
Chee was his interpreter
as he began to make a speech to the people.
Black Horse was standing against the counter over to one side.
The people of his band were standing with him.
The people who had promised their children for school were named, and we were told many things about the school.
Then Black Horse spoke up and said, "This business of taking children away from people to put them in school - when is it going to affect the people from over beyond the mountain?"
He said
"It will reach you sometime.
Tomorrow these will start out and will be routed right along the mountainside.", said Little Chief (Shipley)
"We'll not give you a one of our children.
And we'd just as soon fight over the matter as not.", said Black Horse balking stubbornly.
Speaking this way to each other the Agent and Black Horse exchanged many words.
The one I referred to as Limper was standing near Black Horse with a blanket wrapped around his middle.
And those of this band were lined up, one behind the other.
On February 2, four of us set out from Tuba City.
We were a selected group.
We went to Winslow.
At dusk we took off in a plane.
We landed in Phoenix.
It took us 30 minutes to get there.
Then early on the following morning we were awakened,
and taken off in a car
We went to the Navy Field.
At six o'clock we were put aboard a plane.
There were four planes.
We each got aboard a different one.
I was sent aboard the plane called ’Tomahawk.’
It was a four motored plane.
Planes of this type can carry a huge load.
I found a great pile of alfalfa aboard.
These planes can even carry automobiles.
Then we took off
for the Navajo country.
We flew over Winslow.
When we passed the reservation boundary they said to me, “From now on it's up to you.
You know where the people live.”
Then we flew over the lower end of the black lava peaks, and over Oraibi.
And then over the lower end of the mountains and over Cow Springs.
And then on over Shonto and over the ridge.
And then on down to Oljato.
Then we flew over Mexican Hat.
While we were flying through there, there were other planes flying alongside us.
They remained at the same distance apart.
We had earphones on, and talked to one another by radio.
This way we discussed our position with one another.
This is how we arrived.
And then we flew up along the San Juan River.
Before we got to Shiprock we turned to go alongside the mountain range, toward Lukachukai.
We circled several times over Lukachukai,
and then we went toward Chinle.
And then over Ganado and Klagetoh,
to the railroad.
Then we turned around
and went back over Greasewood and Sunrise Springs.
Then we followed the ridge up over Black Mountain.
We continued to Kayenta where we turned around.
And then we started back to Phoenix,
where we arrived at noon.
We ate and then flew right back over on the same route, and everything that had happened seemed like a dream. It was late in the afternoon when we got back to Phoenix.
That's how we went about over our land dropping hay.
In the late evening we all returned to Phoenix.
Like this I went across our land unloading bales of hay.
And they told us there'd be another flight on the next morning.
On the next day, February 4, we took off again.
We were awakened from sleep at four o'clock, before dawn.
However, we didn't take off until six o'clock.
That day the fog was really thick.
You can't tell where you are in that kind of weather.
On that day I was up 18,000 feet in the sky -
I don't know how far above the clouds.
I kept asking how high we were.
And the pilot would tell me we were 18,000 feet above the ground (i.e. above sea level).
I was just a little bit scared.
The plane would repeatedly drop (in an air pocket).
It would suddenly drop as much as 500 feet.
The pilot told me he didn't blame me for being scared.
It's a life or death matter when you ride a plane.
Nevertheless, we hauled two loads that day.
Nonetheless we hauled two loads again by the time the sun went down
On the next day, which was February 5, we met with the Governor of Arizona.
We also met with an army officer from California.
These two men got aboard and we took off again.
They radioed ahead that these men were aboard such and such a plane.
We were loaded with hay, food and firewood.
We dumped these on the Hopis.
We dropped them on Walpi, Shipaulovi, Shimopovi, Oraibi, Hotevilla, and Ndadziizdeli.
We made about two runs over these villages.
As we flew over them we watched and saw people swarming about.
We said they must be fighting over the firewood.
These men with whom we flew asked me many questions.
“To what extent are the people suffering,”
they asked me.
I pointed out to them the various things the people were suffering from.
After we had inspected the reservation we flew back, but to Tucson.
There the two men got off
As for us, we flew back and got off at Phoenix.
On the next day, which was the sixth, I didn't go out,
because the plane had made me somewhat deaf.
That happened to two of us.
On Monday the seventh I went again.
We went out according to our instructions.
That day we made four flights,
hauling only hay.
On the eighth we again went out.
The main thing we hauled was hay.
Like on that other occasion, there was again a lot of fog.
It looked strange up above the clouds.
In some places the clouds looked like mountain ranges; some looked like sand dunes, and some exactly like mesas.
You couldn't see the earth below.
Nevertheless, we carried four loads.
In the evening, on our return trip, one of the motors caught fire. It happened between Flagstaff and Phoenix.
“Look what happened?”
“It's burning!” said the pilot.
I looked and saw a fire sitting out alongside.
There's nothing you can do when such things happen.
It’s a scary situation
You never can tell what will happen.
Even if you jump out you'll lose your life.
Travel by plane means that death is involved
It cannot be known.
You just sit and hope for the best.
I racked my brains trying to think how we were going to put out the fire.
But there is a fire extinguisher right alongside these motors
so when something like this happens the fire is easily put out.
When we got back we were told that we could have the next day off.
This was welcome news.
It was no fun!
The pilots take turns.
Some fly until noon,
and some take the afternoon shift.
If there are four flights there are four pilots (one taking each flight).
And those who did the dropping also took turns.
But we (guides) had to stay aboard all day long.
That was how it was too with the other Navajos with whom I went to Phoenix.
Some more (Navajos) followed us.
They had the same function as we did.
They thought it would be easy
I heard them saying that.
After three days (of flying), a man from Kayenta said that he had been unable to spot his own hogan.
He simply couldn't find it.
He had been asking that hay be dropped at his own house for three days, but he couldn't find it himself.
Nope!
The plane almost turned over with me (looking for it),” he said with concern.
He told me about this.
This man I'm talking about is one called Checked Shirt.
When he said the plane nearly turned over with him it was because (this plane was flying low and to gain altitude) the plane had to fly at a steep climb - (it seemed that it would fall over backward).
That's what the pilot (of this plane) told me.
The small planes - the two motored ones - loaded at Winslow and hauled from there.
These big planes have four motors.
They loaded and hauled from Phoenix.
They did this because the Winslow Airport was too small for them.
In flight the crew would discuss position.
They knew this by means of a map and flight time.
They work on a basis of single minutes. They would say it's so far between certain points.
And they went on the basis of how many minutes it would take.
So this is my experience up above the land of my people.
I looked the place over from there.
And it is true.
In some places cattle and horses were just standing about, probably on account of the crusted snow.
They would break through this crust, and just stand there.
They wouldn't go on.
Then they would starve or freeze to death right where they stood.
In some places the sheep were kept in the corrals all day long.
People would merely bring them branches.
This is how my people suffered.
This was my people's disaster.
Many people lost stock.
Maybe the range riders and district supervisors feel thankful for it because it reduced the stock
This is how my people suffered.
This is no small matter.
God punished us.
That’s what I think.
There is a passage where God says that the people will be punished, and that's what happened.
It happened eighteen years ago too.
We were punished at that time.
We Navajos still haven't found out that God is punishing us.
That's the way it is.
I have a little story to tell --
a childhood story
and one which I tell to the children.
When I was little, perhaps eight years old, I used to herd sheep up on top of Lukachukai Mountain with a cousin.
My cousin was just a little bit older than I was --
he was perhaps nine years old at that time.
That was about how big we were when we herded sheep by ourselves.
At that time up there on the mountain there were those that live in mountains, bears as they are called.
But one does not mention their name "bear”. People who live over there toward the mountains never say “bear”.
[But at the time when we were small and used to herd our sheep up there we did not know things like this.] Only my cousin had a smattering of such information,
and he used to teach me what he knew.
‘There are certain things here in the mountains. There is something called ‘bear,” but one never refers to it by that name.
People do not say ‘bear’,
so never say that word,
He would say as he taught me.
He was older than I was so he had learned some things.
“Bear is called by other names,”
he would say, instructing me. "In the summer time it is called 'bushy-tail'.
Then in the morning when we would take out the sheep he would again remind me of this lesson.
We would take the sheep out,
and we would herd them in a real wilderness area.
These areas were dense with pine, spruce, aspen and oak.
Water flowed out from the canyons, and little lakes lay in the flats beyond.
It was very beautiful up there on the mountain at that time.
We had a large herd of sheep.
When they spread out into the brush we would just let them go and follow them.
My cousin would tell me to go a certain direction, and we would then separate.
When the sheep would be on the side of the mountain, I'd skirt them from above.
And when I would go up there, I'd remember what he had told me about not mentioning the word ‘bear’.
I used to go around wondering why under the sun a person should not say the word ‘bear’,
so one day I decided to have some fun with my cousin by running down toward him as he walked along below me.
So I dashed toward him. ”Here comes a bear, cousin.
Look out, look out!
A bear! A bear!” I said, as I went zooming by him.
After I had passed beyond him
I turned around and came back to him.
I came back to where he was, and he was certainly angry.
“What do you mean by dashing around and saying that?
Don't you remember that I told you that you are not say that
under any circumstance?
There could be some of them right here nearby.
Don't you remember? That's why I told you that.
I told you that they have a different name,” he said as he scolded me.
Then we started to follow the sheep again.
We trailed them for quite a while when suddenly, from within a nearby oak clump, there came the sound of dogs barking loudly.
What is it that the dogs can be heard barking at?
I wondered what the dogs were barking at so I ran over there.
My cousin followed me.
I got over to where the dog was barking, and there I saw a bear standing.
I stopped right there and looked at him.
He was really angry.
He stood growling.
He was picking up things that were scattered on the ground about him, such as sticks and stones,
and threw them at the dogs.
He used sticks to strike among them
The dogs ran around him barking fiercely.
I got that glimpse of him and then I dashed away.
My cousin too lost no time in running away.
I stopped at a place far removed from the scene.
It was only after I stopped that my cousin caught up with me.
Then we started off again, and went over to where the sheep were walking in order to get in ahead of them and cut them off.
We headed them off toward the flat.
We herded them back down to the open country.
We stayed down there and herded the sheep until noon.
That is how I saw my first bear.
I saw another one on the following day, but at a distance, and walking on the mountainside.
It turns out that must be a bear.
In the fall of that same year we moved from the mountain back down into the valley to herd down there.
We had the rams in the herd, and they used to really fight with one another.
When the rams would attack and butt each other we would each get astride a ram and then urge them to attack.
We would sit on them, and when their heads came crashing together we would really die laughing.
Some times we would fall off, and we would really laugh then too.
That is how we used to have fun with the rams.
Sometimes the rams would get far apart and my cousin would step in between them and then jump aside as their heads came together.
The sheep would be grazing nearby, and we would spend the whole day playing with the rams.
Once we had billy goats in the herd.
That took place down on the plain too,
not in the mountains.
We had one billy goat in the herd that was just a little bit mean.
If a person would bother him, like pinching him or walking behind him, he would get mad.
We always herded sheep with a burro, sitting one behind the other.
But when one would be riding the burro the billy goat would merely look up if one teased him.
He wouldn't do anything under these circumstances even if one got very close to him.
